---
description: Finding MST.
---

# 25.2 Prim's Algorithm

One way to find the MST of a graph is the Prim's Algorithm. In this section, we will discuss both the conceptual and concrete implementation of this algorithm, as well as its runtime analysis.&#x20;

## Conceptual Visualization

{% embed url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZCMTccvfaTQ" %}

Prim's Algorithm is one way to find a MST from a graph. It is as follows:

1. Start from some arbitrary node.
2. Repeatedly add the shortest edge that has **one node inside the MST in construction.**
3. Repeat until there are V - 1 edges.

### Why does it work?

Prim's algorithm works because at all stages of the algorithm, we can reason as follows:&#x20;

* Consider dividing all the nodes in the graph into two sets:
  * Set 1: nodes that are part of the existing MST that's under construction
  * Set 2: all other nodes
* According to the algorithm, we always add the **lightest, or minimally weighted, edge** that crosses this cut.
* By **the Cut Property**, the added edge is necessarily part of the final MST.

## Implementation

{% embed url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoS9ZegarJs" %}

Essentially, this algorithm runs via the same mechanism as [Dijkstra's algorithm](../24.-shortest-paths/24.2-dijkstras-algorithm.md).&#x20;

The only difference is that while Dijkstra's considers candidate nodes by their distance from the source node, Prim's looks at each candidate node's **distance from the MST under construction.**

## Runtime Analysis&#x20;

Because this algorithm runs through the same mechanism as Dijkstra's algorithm, its runtime is also identical to Dijkstra's:

$$
O((|V| + |E| )log(|V|))
$$

Remember, this is because we need to add to a priority queue fringe once for every edge we have, and we need to dequeue from it once for every vertex we have.
