# 39.2 Optimal Compression, Kolmogorov Complexity

## Kolmogorov Complexity

We define the **Kolmogorov complexity** of a bitstream `B` to be the shortest bitstream $$C_B$$ that outputs `B`. Let the _Java-Kolmogorov complexity_ $$K_J(B)$$ be the shortest Java program that generates `B`.

Note that for any bitstream $$B$$, $$K(B)$$ definitely exists. However, finding and proving $$K(B)$$ might be difficult or even impossible.

### Languages and Complexity

An important thing to note is that Kolmogorov complexity is language-independent. To run any program in one language in another, all I have to do is write an interpreter. For example, if I want to run a Python program that is not easily translatable to Java, I could instead just write a Java interpreter to read the text of the Python program and run it. In this case, $$K_J(B) \leq K_P(B) + I$$, where $$I$$ is the length of the interpreter (a constant value).

This highlights a very deep fact about Kolmogorov complexity: most bitstreams are fundamentally incompressible no matter which language we choose for our compression algorithm.

Consider a bitstream of 1,000,000 bits. Out of all compression algorithms possible, only 1 in $$2^{4999999}$$ bitstreams have a change of being compressed by more than 50% (499,999 bits or less).

### Uncomputability

Another important fact regarding Kolmogorov complexity is that it is impossible to compute. A proof of this fact is provided [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kolmogorov\_complexity#Uncomputability\_of\_Kolmogorov\_complexity).

Practically, this means that it is impossible to write a "perfect" (optimal) compression algorithm, since we can't even compute the length of the shortest program!
